AI policy (#5318)
mfem/mfem: CONTRIBUTING.md

Note also that MFEM has a [Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md). By participating
in the MFEM community, you agree to abide by its rules.

## AI Policy

> - Use of AI code generation in MFEM is allowed but must be disclosed by selecting the `AI-assisted` label on the PR.

Reviewer: I'd recommend something slightly stronger -- all code commits include a trailer acknowledging the agent generating the code. Claude Code and ChatGPT Codex do this automatically in their default configurations if you use them to write commit messages. Repo history is easier to migrate and easier to rewrite (if you have to remove offending commits) via filtering on commit messages than querying the GitHub API for PR labels and commit-PR correspondences unless you have a PR merge strategy to support it, like squash-merging (if you do that, then maybe commit trailers are unnecessary).

Author: Interesting idea.

My expectations is that most of the commits in the near future will still be issued by humans. If that turns out not to be the case, then I think we should amend the policy.

Reviewer 2: It's not clear what any attribution for agents will ultimately look like. e.g., some people [object to `Co-Authored-by:`](https://github.com/anthropics/claude-code/issues/53259), some people are [suggesting](https://github.com/anthropics/claude-code/issues/36105) the [not-yet-widely-supported-or-defined `Assisted-by:`](https://gist.github.com/jlebon/dd287bd01218a59bb41d000c9e7d3897) trailer, and some people think [there shouldn't be any attribution for agents at all](https://github.com/anthropics/claude-code/issues/36105#issuecomment-4234102160).

We are leaning, at least on Spack, towards doing *something* to track AI commits -- but we're not sure how best to label them.  There are already a few Co-authored-by Claude trailers in our commits; I suspect there will be more.

Reviewer 3: I agree with @goxberry. There may be AI-assisted commits and non-AI-assisted commits within the same PR. And as a reviewer it can be helpful to have this more atomic information. It also can be easier (in the sense that one might forget what the policy is on a given repository) to forget adding a PR label

Reviewer 4: It's more complicated than that. As an example say you ask for an implementation of an algorithm in a paper, the ai generates a coarse pass that shows a skeleton, or maybe some code snippet to demonstrate the idea, then you tweak a few lines, or show an example of a particular refactor you'd prefer (effectively reviewing the results), then once you've had a dialog to get to the form you want, the ai does a pattern match beyond just copy and paste to apply it, and once this is all done you have a single set of changes to commit. I have personally found this to be the most effective way to get good results from the tools, and looking at many of the most prolific devs in large LLM projects, it's a pattern increasingly adopted widely. What is the attribution of the code in such a commit?

Another similar problematic case, say you make a "toy" to try out some paper you're interested in, basically taking all the shortcuts imaginable, real pure AI slop, but it shows it kind of works. You look at the results, decide you like them, then go to the code and basically review and say things like "we'd need to change these things", and then decide (surprisingly), to type it all up yourself in a more acceptable for the rest of the codebase. Do you own that copyright? You looked at some LLM output, if that was GPL, even if you didn't know, technically you can never contribute on that topic again, as you're not a clean room anymore. To what extent *can* a human do a clean room implementation if you ever worked in a codebase and don't have total amnesia? You can and should attribute the paper the algorithm came from (obviously), but any code you ever write is suspect from a copyright perspective.

For any technical policy solution you can come up with a confounding example, and they're not just edge cases, but quite probably happen all the time. Any "largely by AI" description similarly fails, as there's too much wriggle through there. Expecting "commit trailers" or "ai only commits" ties into a very particular usage style of AI which is just not how developers actually work. I think if anything the policy should go the other way, assume AI by default, and you can explicitly say you DIDN'T use it if you were in the increasingly rare group.

Reviewer 5: > You looked at some LLM output, if that was GPL, even if you didn't know, technically you can never contribute on that topic again, as you're not a clean room anymore.

This is a high standard, and not at all specific to GPL/copyleft. (If you produce infringing content without attribution, it is still a license violation for permissive licenses like MIT. But permissive licenses can be complied with post-hoc after a complaint is filed: "oops, we've added attribution to the list", and it's hard to claim sufficient financial damages to justify litigation for merely failing to include attribution. With GPL or proprietary licenses, the infringing code needs to be removed and there may be sufficient damages for court.)

It's important to recognize that copyright is about *expression*, not ideas. The purpose of clean-room design is to avoid incidentally infringing expression, often while intentionally implementing the same ideas with access to the original within temporal proximity. Note that "substantial similarity" is circumstantial evidence of process, and the intent, access, and temporal proximity would provide further evidence. So clean-room design is used to guard against that specific high legal risk. It is unusual for a person to subconsciously replicate substantial expression from works that they have read long ago. Most people's memories retain ideas much more clearly than expression, and as long as you're creating an original expression, there is no infringement. (I would contend, citing construct validity failures, that LLMs do not represent ideas and thus they are always manipulating expression. This is a minority opinion, but few legal scholars have a clear understanding of the technology.)

Note that while plagiarism (representing ideas as your own) is 100% legal, it is scholarly misconduct.

From Lemley & Ouellette (2025):
<img width="935" height="711" alt="LemleyOuellette-CopyrightPlagiarismVenn" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6a42c305-d4f0-4d80-ab08-c37a47fe7ba9" />

Reviewer 3: > Expecting "commit trailers" or "ai only commits" ties into a very particular usage style of AI which is just not how developers actually work.

It's how some developers work. I don't think AI only commits are helpful. I can always ask AI how some code works, so in order for `git blame` to give me additional helpful information I want to see a human there. To me this goes to the second bullet of this policy and the first part of the third policy regarding correctness: the human submitter needs to be responsible. Now of course that human may no longer be reachable at some point to ask how the code works and so that opportunity for human knowledge transfer is lost, but I still think `git blame` should always show a human.

On the other hand adding AI as a co-author to me is helpful information, whether in the end all they did was propose the initial idea and did not directly author any lines of the changeset submitted for review. It is standard practice in paper submission to list laboratory PIs as co-authors even if "all they did" was generate the research idea or undergradutes who "all they did" was run the experiments or perform the data analysis that led to the results published in the paper; these co-authors may not have written a single line of the manuscript.

This is not unique to attributing AI agents. We recently interviewed a candidate for hire and asked for them to point us to contributions to OSS projects. They pointed to one PR that had tens of commits ranging from "implement big feature X" to "code formatting" changes. These various commits tell a story ranging from "ability to implement big feature X" to "experience meeting CI requirements". In this case the committer was the interviewee's mentor who did not commit with his mentee listed as the author nor as a co-author. So in the end we had no idea what part of the PR story the interviewee had been a part of and couldn't really verify his contribution.

Apart from this, this AI policy asks for AI disclosure. Currently that disclosure is done through github metadata. Many of us experienced the github status degradation this week. One of my PRs was missing for multiple days. If github crashed tomorrow, there would be no record of AI disclosure in this repository apart from what is done in git logs. I think if we're serious about AI disclosure, it needs to live with git, not metadeta of a remote host not controlled by MFEM.

Reviewer 3: Even if you don't commit from an agent CLI or something like that, you can write a 2-3 line git subcommand that automates co-authorship for you

Reviewer 3: I think it's fair to say that AI disclosure is most important at the time of PR review, in which case using github metadata is defensible. However, I think it's informative if a year from now or five years from now I perform a `git blame` and can see the human and AI authors from the git hash

> - By submitting a PR, the author acknowledges that they have reviewed and understand the changes they are proposing.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- By submitting a PR, the author acknowledges that they have reviewed and understand all of the changes they are proposing.
```
Not critical, but we might want to consider making this more "strongly worded"

Reviewer 3: Talking just this morning with @roystgnr he raised the [Van Halen test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Van_Halen_test) in reference to agent-produced content

> - PR authors are fully responsible for correctness, licensing, and attribution of all changes.

Reviewer 5: This last line warrants unpacking. Is any due diligence expected to ensure that your LLM-based coding workflow does not emit infringing content? There are papers showing that 50-100 token verbatim sequences are routine from commercial models with organic prompting, and much more with fine-tuning. For example, [this study](https://cauchy221.github.io/Alignment-Whack-a-Mole/) shows that when fine-tuned on one body of work (even a public domain one; in the software context, perhaps the very project you are working on), verbatim sequences of hundreds or thousands of words are then emitted from copyright material that was not mentioned during the fine-tuning process.

If a human contributor to a project submitted such flagrant violations, you would likely either refuse to work with them again or treat their submissions as presumed-adversarial until demonstrated otherwise.

Note that infringement puts the whole community and system of trust at risk. If you care about outcomes, the standard cannot merely be what humans in the system intended.

Reviewer 7: This was gnawing at me a bit, too. Any infringing content is of concern, but there may be particular concern if the replicated work comes from a library under the GNU GPL or other viral license, since that would have implications on MFEM's own licensing and on downstream projects.

Reviewer 3: Certainly a valid concern to explore. How does the open source community survive and move forward in this era? I can say that using coding agents, I have actually been able to "develop" code for the first time in almost a year given time constraints. These incredibly powerful tools from big tech come on the backs of the public commons (well I suppose also likely from non-public "commons" depending on how the data has been crawled, I'm far from an expert in this domain.) We can choose to forgo these powerful tools with the valid concern that we may be trampling on someone's copyright. But there are going to be many proprietary actors that do not honor those concerns and their technology will continue to develop. I don't trust that the justice system will be able to reverse engineer who the bad actors are at a pace that matches the violations.

It would be nice if we lived in a world where it was the responsibility of the tech giants to not have their tools spit-out copyrighted content instead of it being the job of the open source developer to try and validate that there hasn't been a copyright violation. @jedbrown I believe you actually cited a court case in Europe where OpenAI tried to push liability on the tool user for copyright violation on the PETSc discord. I believe the outcome in that case was that the court didn't allow OpenAI that cop-out?

I hope I'm not coming off as saying we should steal copyrighted code (and potentially illegally re-license it). It's just my strong belief that in a just world it shouldn't be the open source developer's job to spend time trying to avoid this possibility when attempting to use productivity tools with good intentions.

(I know there is also active debate on whether these tools boost productivity. In my personal experience, if you don't use high reasoning, then the tool may not add productivity or may even slow productivity. But with high reasoning, like seems to be the default in claude code, I have noticed a significant productivity boost)

Reviewer 3: Obviously, any real possibility of being litigated against has to be put practically ahead of any ideal system of justice

Reviewer 8: Presumably the policy also applies to AI-generated documentation (e.g., doxygen comment generation).

Reviewer 9: Honestly, I think 'high level' usage is exactly the sort of usage that is most at risk of producing copyrighted code (or ideas from other academics without attribution) or code the submitter does not fully understand. Both of those issues are problems for academic codebases.

Author: > Presumably the policy also applies to AI-generated documentation (e.g., doxygen comment generation).

@tepperly, the policy is intended for everything that goes into the codebase, including comments. We considered extending it to include e.g. PR descriptions and GitHub discussions but decided not to include that at this point

Author: @jedbrown, @sethwatts, @lindsayad and @jeremylt -- we understand your concerns and I wish there was an easy answer to them. 

As I stated, this is an initial policy that tries to strike a balance. The last bullet is not new -- this was always expected from contributors, we are just reminding them about it. We don't want to prescribe how people do their work or to discourage the use of AI in whatever way is most productive to them, so I am not sure what more we can do. We have a great community with many great people in it that we trust, so I am optimistic that they will use AI responsibly and that its use will be a force for significant positive change in MFEM.

Reviewer 10: Reopening the conversation, since I suspect @lobpcg closed it unintentionally. 😄

Reviewer 5: Understood, I just wanted to make this part explicit, especially if you revisit. There have been a lot of cases in which lip service is done to "using AI responsibly" and it produces fraud and failures through no intent (over 1000 lawyers have been sanctioned for Rule 11 violations, AWS decries the "blast radius" of LLM-generated code causing infrastructure failures, etc. throughout society). Wikipedia used to have a responsible use policy and after observing how it fails to ensure epistemic integrity in practice, the editors nearly-unanimously voted for a full prohibition on generated content.

There are various theories for why an open-source software project need not be as concerned as in prior decades. The smol bean theory says the open-source project doesn't have enough money to be worth litigating over copyright issues (though perhaps users do have money and the project may value the trust of wealthy users). The denial of service theory posits that the industry is sufficiently powerful that courts (perhaps with legislative assistance) will rationalize routine violation or at least keep it hard enough to make claims that there will never be a reckoning. "Everyone" is doing it, so how bad could the consequences be?

There are also issues of reliability as well as the social and cognitive/technical debt consequences. I'd encourage reading the [SciPy policy and linked discussion](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/24583). Their policy remains permissive, but more critical. If a project actually depends on preventing process failures from occurring, it would need to implement safety engineering practices. Those are onerous, unpopular, and hard to enforce. I have no leadership role in MFEM and I don't expect to change minds today, but I expect that like Wikipedia, many projects will revisit their policies over the coming years, and these discussion threads may have value at that time. Cheers.

Author: I suspect you are right @jedbrown. Thanks (as always) for sharing your thoughts.

Reviewer 9: Similarly, I did want to explicitly surface the idea of research software as a first class research artifact like papers. (See also JOSS)

We are researchers, generating software for the use by other researchers, so we should attribute where we get our ideas from, just like we do with other research products. LLM based tools just make that harder, especially when a large volume of content is generated all at once.

The third bullet delineates this responsibility imho

Reviewer 3: > Honestly, I think 'high level' usage is exactly the sort of usage that is most at risk of producing copyrighted code (or ideas from other academics without attribution)

This will likely come off as combative but is not meant to; I want to know the answer. Do you have a reference for this? I would expect higher reasoning to be capable of doing more synthesis from fundamental principles, but that is an intuited feeling not backed by any research I did.

> or code the submitter does not fully understand

This I will not dispute at all.

I have found LLM high reasoning most useful in generating compact bug fixes like [petsc/petsc!9230](https://gitlab.com/petsc/petsc/-/merge_requests/9230) and https://github.com/mfem/mfem/pull/5316. The former I certainly did not understand the code changes initially for; the latter bugfix was very straightforward to understand but also would not have been found in the context where I encountered it (wrapping MFEM mesh generation capabilities in MOOSE) by, say, the default reasoning for codex 5.4 which is "medium".

I 100% agree with this:

 > We are researchers, generating software for the use by other researchers, so we should attribute where we get our ideas from, just like we do with other research products. LLM based tools just make that harder, especially when a large volume of content is generated all at once.

However, as has been stated elsewhere the risk of not properly respecting licensing/attribution has always existed. We are still looking for a first-class permissive open source meshing library to use in MOOSE. I asked the Gmsh developers in the past, years before coding agents were on the scene, if they would consider changing from GPL to LGPL and they said no, which is completely their prerogative and I hold them no ill will for their decision. (In light of the LLM era, I have wished that MOOSE was GPL so that I could be (even) more morally outraged at the high likelihood that code generation capabilities were trained on top of its back). I could always have looked through Gmsh's code with an ill intention of stealing it for our use. And perhaps now with LLMs there is an increased tension with the ability to ask the LLM to write me all the meshing code I need. In that instance I would be quite concerned that the LLM might regurgitate significant segments of copyrighted code like Gmsh's. So I haven't asked the LLM to do that nor will I accept a large meshing pull request into MOOSE in the future without running something like JPlag on it first. Anyway I fear I've made this way too much about me without making any comprehensible argument.

My TLDR is that I fully agree with the third bullet in this AI policy and will also be watching closely how we evolve as an OSS community in the coming years with respect to it

Reviewer 9: I don't recall the exact case but @jedbrown has an example or two of LLMs replicating academic algorithms without attribution when prompted at a high level to accomplish a task 

Edit: Tim Davis's sparse matrix algorithms was the example I was thinking about

Reviewer 5: Tim Davis's examples were in 2022 with GitHub Copilot prior to the release of ChatGPT. In that, typing `// sparse matrix transpose<TAB>` would emit a page of his code without attribution. The [class action suit](https://githubcopilotlitigation.com/) from that time is still working its way to a trial.

Last fall, a [German court found](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2025/nov/11/chatgpt-violated-copyright-laws-german-court-rules) that OpenAI was liable for emitting infringing content. They tried to throw users under the bus:
> Because its output is generated by users of the chatbot via their prompts, OpenAI said, they were the ones who should be held legally liable for it – an argument rejected by the court.

Reviewer 3: I think we're using 'high' for two different meanings. @jeremylt I think you're talking about a high-level prompt, e.g. describing what you want in broad terms. I meant 'high reasoning' which I believe is something relatively new in the frontier LLM models, which [this article](https://machinelearning.apple.com/research/illusion-of-thinking), for example, refers to.

It's certainly scary that a high-level prompt like `sparse matrix transpose` would regurgitate a page of code verbatim

Reviewer 9: The 'high reasoning' is indeed new to me, though it is my understanding from industry programmers that the issue of attribution accuracy or omission is still there with Claude, and productivity when measured and studied is not living up to developers' gut sense of how much faster they think they are.

Reviewer 5: Yeah, "reasoning" or "thinking" is branding for asking a chatbot to create a sequence of prompts for a chatbot, that are then executed (all internally). It has no greater construct validity, as you can see, for example, by looking at the "thinking" modes in Figure 1 of [this paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.21687). The paper has some discussion of "reasoning traces" and the false confidence they inspire. (Apologies for the tangent.)

<details>

In this study, questions are asked of an LLM in reference to an image, but no image is provided. The numbers designate how often a fabricated response is emitted (e.g., diagnosing a medical condition based on a non-existent image). The responses are confident and detailed. I reproduced this by getting pages of legal analysis of a (non-existent) "contract", including fabricated "direct quotes".
</details>

<img width="831" height="835" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/33c7f821-24ff-447a-800b-82a099797db4" />

Reviewer: I can only speak to my industry experience post-MFEM -- the highest return I get out of AI assistance is code review, and that's what I'd advocate for based on the risk-reward profile.

I can't think of a time when it's caused a copyright issue because the feedback tends to be "this logic is wrong because..." rather than explicitly proposing code snippets as fixes. The code review isn't perfect. It tends to miss context that isn't in a project's repository (see [this Anthropic post-mortem](https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/april-23-postmortem) as an example of this failure mode), which causes both false positives and false negatives. I've also seen AI code agents (Codex 5.4, in particular) miss some concurrency bugs that it eventually diagnosed after some prompting. But it does catch a lot of bugs I'd have otherwise missed.

Reviewer 3: I don't think this thread tangent is a total waste as it will provide historical context for the future and perhaps inform people's LLM usage today. Obviously hallucination is a very real problem even in newer generations of frontier models. Just yesterday chatGPT 5.3 (standard) completely hallucinated a response when I asked it what turbulence model is used at URL X (behind a Wiley verification for humanness). I re-tried this today toggling between "standard" and "thinking" settings.

### Standard

<img width="849" height="316" alt="Screenshot 2026-04-29 at 9 59 13 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/26e1444f-25bc-4600-91aa-b3b6d8735bad" />

### Thinking

<img width="817" height="506" alt="Screenshot 2026-04-29 at 10 06 55 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/995e7a71-78a9-4587-b4c3-ce43457ab2f7" />

The "thinking" result is correct in this case, which it tracked down through the abstract on arxiv. This is just a one-case anecdote in the context of literature search/URL following. I trust my hallucination experience in a multimodal context like the paper you cite @jedbrown would match what the authors show. In the context of code generation in the past couple months I have not personally experienced any hallucination of constructs that don't exist (e.g. trying to use class methods that aren't real) with the models I've used. (I have seen plenty of bad proposed designs though)

I think the results of the Apple paper investigating different levels of LLM "reasoning" are very interesting. For low complexity cases, they show that higher reasoning LLMs overthink and perform worse than standard LLMs. At medium complexity, the reasoning LLMs out-perform standard LLMs. At high complexity both reasoning and standard LLMs completely fail. That paper evaluates performance based on puzzles

Reviewer 3: On the topic of raw coding velocity vs. the overall throughput and health of a software project, I think this [Stephane Maes article](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Stephane-Maes-2/publication/402738170_Evaluating_the_Efficacy_of_Artificial_Intelligence_in_Software_Engineering_A_Post-February_2026_Analysis/links/69bb64acf5cc681fca611803/Evaluating-the-Efficacy-of-Artificial-Intelligence-in-Software-Engineering-A-Post-February-2026-Analysis.pdf), though it has some typos and attempts to sell a meta agent in places, is a good read

Reviewer 3: Ok strike it, just got a clear hallucination from a coding agent today 😆

Author: Thanks for the interesting discussion and information guys. I very much agree that this is a complex and important topic for the community and we don't claim to have all the answers with this initial policy.

> - PR authors are fully responsible for correctness, licensing, and attribution of all changes.

Reviewer 10: I suggest the following small tweaks:
* In the first bullet, add ", e.g." after "disclosed" to leave the door open to other forms of disclosure like leaving a comment in the initial PR post.
* In the third bullet, replace "fully responsible" with "still responsible" to emphasize that this is not a new requirement -- it is just being re-emphasized in this context.
```suggestion
## AI Policy
- Use of AI code generation in MFEM is allowed but must be disclosed, e.g. by
  selecting the `AI-assisted` label on the PR.
- By submitting a PR, the author acknowledges that they have reviewed and
  understand the changes they are proposing.
- PR authors are still responsible for correctness, licensing, and attribution
  of all changes.
```

Author: I like both of these suggestions, thanks @v-dobrev
